Academic Dean and VP Provost: Michael Zimmerman
Opening Speech at Academic Retreat – 09/15/11

(Michael Zimmerman): Those are lousy acts to follow. [Laughter] But at least they got you laughing and applauding, so...Let's start with that.

It's difficult for me to adequately express how pleased I am to be here today, and to see so many of you as well. Although I had the good fortune of meeting many of you during my brief time on campus, there are many more with whom I have not yet spoken. I hope to correct that soon. I've struggled trying to figure out what would be the most useful way to spend the next half hour or so. I wondered what I could say that would be productive to all of you, who know Evergreen so much better than I do. One thing that I absolutely wanted to be certain about...was that everyone needs to understand that I know great deal...that I know I have a great deal to learn about the college and it's culture.

I suspect, that most people who already interacted with me will tell you that I've been asking many many questions...many questions. Those questions have been my way of attempting to understand how the college conducts its business, what it values, and what inspires its faculty and staff.

So let me begin by thanking all of you who have been so incredibly welcoming to Andrea and me. And let me thank you for tolerating my questions, and more than that, attempting to answer them fully and clearly. You've certainly done that. Slowly already my appreciation of much of what makes Evergreen a distinctive institution and special community, is beginning to take shape in my mind. And after struggling, as I said, to find a meaningful message for this morning, I decided to use part of our time together to discuss what it is I think I've learned. I've opted to do this for two reasons. First, it'll do me a great deal of good to articulate my lessons learned and see if they're congruent with what you think. Second, as someone new to the community I may have noticed some patterns that are more difficult for those fully immersed in the culture to have noticed.

I also want to use our time together today to touch on some of the issues that I think are most important in higher education in general, and to present a rough outline of the challenges and opportunities that we face this coming year.

As you likely know, the search process that brought me to campus was not a fast one. What that meant for Andrea and me, was that we had plenty of time to think carefully about what it meant to move her and join a new community. The conversations we had with people associated with the college were consistent and the word that most readily comes to mind when I recall those conversations, as well as so many more since we arrived, is "passion". Person after person in varying ways, made it clear that they were passionate about what they do at Evergreen. That sort of commitment is something different to what we've seen elsewhere. It's something very impressive. As faculty members, staff members, administrators, you all are convinced that you are part of something different and important. You articulate the belief that the nature of the pedagogy here is capable of making very real differences in the lives of students. It's readily apparent to an outsider that the structure of programs leads to very different and dramatically deeper relationships between many students and faculty members. When I was on campus in January, I told the story about how one faculty member dramatically altered my life. Because of his passions, his skill, and his pushing I discovered a love for science that I previously had precious little interest in. So I know first hand, from the students' side of the equation, just how important individual faculty members can be to students. It's been incredibly heartening to hear faculty here talk about the ways in which you had just that sort of influence on students. Those stories made Evergreen a community I wanted to join.

I've also been excited by the way in which faculty speak of the nature and craft of your pedagogy. Two things have stood out with me. First, you seem able to encourage more creative work from students that I've seen anywhere else. Second, you truly infer the active participants in the learning process that goes on in programs. I'm deeply impressed by what I've seen so far. I've loosely affiliated with two programs for the Fall quarter. So, I'm very much looking forward to discover a great deal more. I've also been delighted by the frequency with which conversations naturally include references to social justice and sustainability. (05.00) As I had hoped, these values seem deeply rooted and infused and rooted throughout the curriculum. Related to this, I've been impressed by the fact that, according to statistics provided by the institutional research, 81% of our graduates this last year, were part of at least one traditionally underserved group. That's an amazing statistic, and one that I haven't seen anywhere else. Indeed from that perspective alone, we're doing an admirable job of fulfilling our mission as a public college.

Similarly, you heard our team to talk, just magnificently, about what this campus does. The fact that we're meeting here today, on the Tacoma campus, a campus that plays an absolutely critical role of transforming the community here, is noteworthy. On the downside, no reason to be too optimistic [Laughter], the improvement to an improved pedagogy, many of you have told me, has led to over-work. What's most fascinating to me, about this observation, is the fact that so many people have said, that this is a personal, rather than an institutional problem. In other words, as faculty members, you create your own workloads, and often make them far larger and complex than is perhaps healthy or even absolutely necessary. One of the great virtues of the Evergreen environment for faculty is the amount of autonomy people have, both in terms of what you teach, and how you teach. This autonomy coupled with the passion I mentioned a minute ago, can move into a faculty being unable to set limits on yourself. Unfortunately, I don't have a solution for the problem, but it did seem worth mentioning for a number of reasons. For example, I've already seen too many instances where this overwork has manifested itself in late student evaluations. Particularly troubling because these missing evaluations can have devastating effects on our students, from a loss of financial aid, to missed job and graduate school opportunities.

I've encountered four other surprises, which, I think in my mind at least, tangentially relate to one another. Rather than fully exploring these surprises let me just mention them, and perhaps sometime later I can get your take on them. I'm interested in learning whether you share my initial impressions. So...as a list: 1st, on more occasions than I expected, curricular conversations that I had, have taken decidedly disciplinary turns. 2nd, I've gotten the sense that actual curricular planning is very uneven across the college's planning units. 3rd, there seems to be less focus on what it means to be part of the liberal arts college that I expected 4th, I've been surprised by just how far the college has wandered from the original date of the curriculum; being almost exclusively comprised of year-long, team taught, interdisciplinary programs. And I use that word "wandered" just now, because I'm not convinced that the change was made with intentionality. I'm interested in learning more about all of those impressions. Those were surprises to me, and to see if...they're real to you as well, or if they're just idiosyncratic. This brief linty of surprises leads me to my next point.

I'd like to speak briefly about what it means to be part of a liberal arts college, and the nature of discourse that we should expect within such a community. I assume that most of you, like me, are frustrated by the publics' lack of understanding about what it is we do here at Evergreen. In saying that I mean that the public isn't well versed in what liberal arts colleges do in general, not Evergreen in particular. In fact, from what I've seen, significant progress has been made promoting an understanding of Evergreen's unique pedagogical style. I further assume, that you are as dismayed as I am about the way in which resources seem to be systemically diverted from higher education around the country. And I assume that you are as uncomfortable as I am about the public's relentless push to have student's train for a job rather than educated for a lifetime. In other words, there seems to be little understanding and less respect for the principles of a liberal arts education.

A few years back, Carol Geary Schneider, President of AACU, the Association of American Colleges and Universities, explained how such a situation might arise. (10.00) She wrote: "Even as specific practices with liberal education are being reinvented and reinvigorated, the tradition itself is largely disguised from public notice. Educational innovations are heavily promoted by the academy, but rarely described in campus promotion materials as liberal, or liberal arts education. Students who participate in them may never even be told that they are engaged in contemporary forums of liberal education. Graduate students preparing to teach spend virtually no time considering their own role in either of these innovations or in the larger traditions of liberal learning", she goes on to say, "Given this conspiracy of voluntary silence", let me say that again, "given this conspiracy of voluntary silence, there is very little public understanding, or even awareness of liberal education. Despite its enduring influence on both established and innovative curriculum. Studies show that the public does not value liberal education (11.00), even though the same public places high value on the outcomes, such as analytical judgment, social responsibility, and economic opportunity to which a liberal education leads. Campus leaders report that students...[Clears Throat]...excuse me, campus leaders also report that students also don't know what liberal education is, and that many faculty are also uncertain". What a great turn phrase: "the conspiracy of voluntary silence", and how true it is that we rarely take the time to discuss the liberal arts, and their value directly with our students, or, unfortunately, as much as we should with each other.

Evergreen is better than many places in this regard from a number of perspectives: First, at least our webpage refers to use as a public liberal arts and science college in the Pacific Northwest. But even that terminology implies that sciences are something that stemmed from the liberal arts. As I said a few minutes ago, my early impression is that we don't speak openly and directly of the liberal arts on campus. There may well be serious consequences beyond the obvious arising from the conspiracy of voluntary silence. There's an anthropological concept, and yes it's a controversial one, known as the principal of linguistic relativity, which asserts that the structure of a language effects the way in which its speakers are able to conceptualize the world. While I don't want to get into the full anthropological debate, I do want to point out that the strong, and therefore most controversial version of linguistic relativity, implies that without certain linguistic constructs entire aspects of the world are simply unable to be recognized by speakers of that language. Regardless of whether the strong version or linguistic relativity is fully accurate or not, there is ample evidence to demonstrate the different ways we use language cross-culturally to describe our world. Just think about the different type of metaphors we use both across cultures and across political groups among our own culture. The point is, when we don't speak openly or often about the value and power of the liberal arts, we limit our ability, and that of our students, to fully conceptualize what the liberal arts might actually mean in the liberal arts.

Similarly, when academics, more broadly, don't address this point in public the debate about the value and importance of higher education is dramatically shifted away from being in education itself and towards the far more utilitarian portion of the spectrum. Let me provide just one example of how our lack of discussion permits others to frame the debate in ways in which they are far more comfortable. As public funding for higher education declines the view constantly being promoted is that the benefit associated with a degree is almost entirely personal, and thus it is not unreasonable to expect individuals to bear the full cost of their own education. This leads to an all too easy rationalization of why skyrocketing tuition is acceptable. Leaving aside socio-economic issues of fairness and equity, framing the conversation in this manner excludes the very real fact that there is great social value in having a population that is liberally educated. Consider myriad ways in which our graduates enrich and transform their communities in which they live. Ignoring this aspect of the conversation limits our perspective greatly and makes it difficult to create fully formed public policy. Having said this I hasten to point out that here in Washington significant progress has been made on this front - not enough - but some. (15.00) Just this week the Seattle Times, along with five co-sponsors, has begun a year-long public education effort entitled "The Greater Good Campaign".

How many of you have heard of that?

...OK.

According...for those of you who haven't - Let me read a sentence from the press release announcing the initiative. Quote, "The goal of the campaign is to build broad awareness that public higher education should not be seen as a personal privilege, but that the states higher education system provides a much larger public good, creating job, enhancing competitiveness, economic growth and innovation, all which benefit the lives of all Washington citizens whether or not they have, or will attend one of the universities".

They're trying to stretch the goals to look...the benefits of higher education are good for all of us. Not just limited to those who are currently enrolled or have been enrolled.

It looks to me like a great a initiative, although from my perspective, it's still focused a bit to heavily on the economic impact of education, but at least it's expanding the conversation, and asks us to look at public rather than private good.

This discussion of the importance of meaningful conversation brings me to another issue about which I feel strongly, the nature of difficult conversations on academic councils. Over the years, I've seen such conversations avoided at all costs, and I've seen them evolve into nasty, uncivil affairs - both have occurred. Only rarely however, have I seen such conversations handled productively and with respect. As American politics sank into the partisan morass that it has become, we in the academy need to find a way to create space for controversial issues to be shared and debated. We need find ways to redact the reasoning by others as critically as we can, while we continue to respect the individual making the argument. When we are unsuccessful at doing this, when we become...when we begin to become uncivil, and begin to vilify those on the opposite side of an issue, we destroy any sense of community that might have developed. Even beyond this point such behavior is apathetical to the principals of free inquiry that are so central to academia. When we criticize individuals instead of ideas what kind of role models are we for our students?

A past colleague of mine, Bell Hooks, addressed this point in a piece entitled, "Black Students Who Reject Feminism". I want to quote about three paragraphs on what she had to say, because she says it so well. She said, "We must continually remind students in a classroom that expression of different opinions and accenting ideas affirms our intellectual process. We should forcefully explain that our role is not to teach them to think as we do, but rather to teach them by example, the importance of taking a stance that is rooted in rigorous engagement, with a full range of ideas about a topic. In learning communities, from grade school to college, everyone, especially those of us in marginalized groups must critically resist any thinking that encourages us to close our minds and hearts. We must constructively confront our differences. Through our actions, questioning, and rigorous exchange of ideas we learn to be more responsive to the actual world of diversity that we encounter, in one way or another, in everyday of our lives", she goes on to say, "we are rarely able to interact only with folks like ourselves who think like we do. No matter how long some of us deny this reality for long...I'm sorry...deny this reality, and long for safety and familiarity of saneness, inclusive ways of knowing and living offers us the only true way to emancipate ourselves in the divisions that limit our minds and our imaginations. Or as poet Audre Lorde has said far more succinctly, "We need to learn how to devise ways to use each others difference to enrich our visions and our joint struggles".

Me again, no longer quoting. [Laughter] I don't want to leave you with higher…with my poorer quality. Bell Hooks and Audre Lorde write so powerfully.

What we have to do collectively - We have to find ways of having robust discussions respectfully. (20.00) We need to find ways to ensure that we don't silence individuals whose arguments we disagree with. After all, if those of us in the academy can't find a way to have meaningful conversations over hotly contested ideas, what hope do we have for society at large? Perhaps - and maybe this is just a papyrus wish - but perhaps we can become an institutional role model for conversations, difficult conversations of sort. This is just one of the items I hope we collectively focus on this year.

There are other issues as well calling for our attention, in this our 40th anniversary year. As you all know better than I, the campus has spent a significant time over the past two years working on the RTaLE initiative. I'll have more to say about RTaLE this afternoon, but for now, I think it's important to provide my perspective on the broader context that has driven RTaLE and explain how I see it fitting in with some other pieces on our collective agenda. I think it fair to say that the curriculum, the nature of pedagogy, advising, and the campus culture are more intrepidly linked than at most other colleges and universities. From that perspective, whatever changes we adopt around the RTaLE initiative will be a beginning, an important first step, but certainly - and it's important to remember this - not a last step. Over the course of this year, looking towards next, I'm optimistic that we will be able to make progress on many fronts.

If you're willing, here's how I envision us proceeding: This Fall quarter, we'll focus primarily on RTaLE and the student empowerment pieces that it addresses, and as I'll say this afternoon, I really do think student empowerment is an important piece of RTaLE. I'm confident that the discussions will be fertile and lead us in many interesting directions, but I don't want us to be diverted from the main task during the quarter, embracing some changes that will help our students do exactly what we say is so critically important, to take ownership of their own education. Due to what we accomplish in the Fall, I hope we can focus on what it means to be a public, interdisciplinary, liberal arts college during the Winter quarter. Those discussions are necessary if we're going to have a robust discussion over the future of our curriculum and curriculum planning structures. I envision that discussion beginning of the Spring, with the focus being to identify some key questions and issues, to enable us to craft a meaningful charge to a long curriculum DTF. That DTF and your research over the summer, and begin a broad consultated process next year, with a proposal, whatever it might be, coming before the faculty towards the end of the year. I suspect from what I've heard since I arrived on campus there are two, not necessarily mutually exclusive views, on undertaking and examination of…an undertaking and examination of the curriculum. On one hand, some have said to me, we've put off such review long enough and we need you begin immediately. On the other hand, others have indicated that we've completed far too many large scale projects of this sort over the years and that yielded no significant end results so there is no reason to begin yet another. Do we get votes? [Laughter]

Let me respond to both. If we begin a curriculum review process right now, I fear it will distract us from the important work before us. I fear we'll jump in without having fully decided what it is we want for college. It's for that reason I want us to reach some tentative closure on the RTaLE pieces and begin serious discussion about how we want to position ourselves as a public, interdisciplinary, liberal arts college, before we move into hard work into reviewing our curriculum structures.

To the cynics among us - maybe all of us - to the cynics among us, those saying we don't need to create yet another plan that will sit on the shelf without any action being taken. Let me channel Bill Clinton for a second [Laughter]I just can't do the right thing with my mouth [Laughter]I feel your pain [Laughter] Indeed I've already seen and read a fair number of those reports in the last decade or so. In response - and that really is serious...this part [Laughter] In response - just last week- I asked the members of the agenda committee to join me in making a promise to all of you. I promise that when members of our community come together to undertake a complex task, and come forth with recommendations that are widely accepted, (25.00) I will do everything within my power - and the agenda committee will help - to implement those recommendations. Without such a promise it's incredibly difficult, if not impossible to encourage bright, busy, talented colleagues to do important work on the behalf of the college. Without such a promise, we'll be forced to live with the status quo, and the passion that I earlier said was so much a part of the Evergreen culture will wither.

One such recommendation that has been sitting on this table for far too long comes from the last hiring priorities DTF. I'm delighted to tell you that we are now ready to take up those recommendations and begin to hire permanent, full-time, undergraduate faculty colleagues. [Clapping] It really is good news. As soon as practical, we'll form search comities and move forward five such searches. Four of the five, we'll search for the four highest priority positions outlined by that DTF. The fifth, following our long-term practice, will be to replace a faculty that left during the first three years on campus. These five searches are a start of what we need to be doing. For various reasons, reasonable reasons at times, we've allowed a percentage of our curriculum taught by temporary hires to expand to an extent that is no longer helpful. As a result of that, the amount of work following those few who have had continuing contracts has increased. That too is not healthy. The searches I'm announcing today are the first steps towards fixing those problems.

A critical second step is also needed: I'm asking that we revisit our process for determining which curricular areas are in the greatest need of new positions. Without going to any detail today, let me just say, that deploying faculty resources is one of the most important collective decisions we make. Such decisions shape the college's future for many years. They shape the future more, frankly, than the work we're going to be doing in half an hour will be looked for the next 40 years. Who we hire says who we are. I want to be as confident as possible that we're making the best decisions we can. Knowing that we are again in the business of searching for new colleagues to join us in this important work of educating students, should I hope make it more attractive to create a process that works for all of us. I hope together you all join me in that.

I don't think it would be fair to leave you with just this good news. So let me share some less than good news with all of you. You've heard some of this, if you read your e-mail yesterday, Les shared some of this and tried to build a context for it, that...that puts it in a good and 'as-healthy-as-possible' perspective. As you know, the late estate revenue numbers are due out later today, with the expectation that those numbers and the one's following later in the year will be well below budget expectations. The governor has asked all state agencies, including Evergreen, to model a 5%, or really a 10% budget reduction. Administratively we have done that, exactly what the governor has asked. And while the picture isn't pretty, it isn't nearly as bad as it could be. For the most part we'll be able to deal with this round of cuts if they come by dramatically depleting college reserves - that's not a good thing - but there are worse things that could've been done. We should all be pleased that we are being so well served by those who helped build those reserve accounts in the first place.

A number of people who have heard about what the governor has asked have wondered how worried should they be...they've asked me that. My response to them and my response to all of you today comes from Harper Lee's classic To Kill a Mockingbird, "As trouble brewed around the Finch family, Atticus regularly soothed Scout and her brother Jem by telling them they shouldn't worry. He would, he assured them, tell them when it was time to worry." [Laughter] I promise you, that I'll tell you when it's time to worry. We’re not yet at that point. However, I can well imagine those who know the book well, rising – glad to see no one did – to remind me that Atticus, as it turns out never did tell them to worry. They almost died in an attack [Laughter] Let me say two things in response.

First, simply, I hope not to make that mistake [Laughter]

(30.00) Second, metaphors and literary allusions aren't meant to be perfect [Laughter]

OK, [Laughter] [Clapping] I feel that I've spoken long enough, perhaps even too long. I'd like to close simply by repeated how delighted, and proud, and pleased I am to be here working with you. Thank you [Clapping]

End (30.27)
